.TH DESC 1 "January 20, 1987" "\(co 1980 Gary Perlman" "|STAT" "UNIX User's Manual"
.SH NAME
desc \- describing a single data distribution
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B desc
[-cfhopsv] [-i interval] [-m min] [-M max] [-F|-t Ho]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I desc
does a number of summary statistics and frequency counts.
The program's input is a series of numbers
separated by newlines, tabs or spaces.
.SH OPTIONS
.de OP
.TP
.B -\\$1 \\$2
..
.OP c
changes -f and -p options to Cumulative.
.OP f
table of midpoints and Frequencies.
Data on bin boundaries
end up in the next lower bin, except for data
on the lower boundary of the first bin, which are put in the first bin.
Thus, the first bin is a doubly closed interval,
while all the others are half open: [],(],(],(],(],...(]
.OP F Ho
requests a F-test of mean = Ho rather than 0 (also -t).
.OP h
prints a Histogram with frequencies.
.OP i width
sets the Interval width for -h, -f & -p.
.OP m min
sets the Minimum of the first interval.
Numbers below it are ignored on input.
.OP M max
sets the Maximum value allowed.
Numbers above it are ignored on input.
.OP o
requests Order statistics (the default with no options).
.OP p
table of midpoints and Proportions.
.OP s
summary Statistics according to SPSS formulas.
.OP t Ho
same as -F option, which also prints a t-test.
.OP v
output statistics in Variable (name=value) format.
.SH LIMITS
.PP
Use the -L option to determine the program limits.
.I desc
does its computations in either one or two
passes, depending on whether the data is stored.
If the -i and -m options are used, then it is not
necessary to store the data for frequency tables.
Otherwise, or if order statistics are requested
(which require storing and sorting the data),
then the number of
input points is limited to some large number,
which can be found with the -L option.
.SH "MISSING VALUES
Missing data values (NA) are counted but not included in the analysis.
.SH EXAMPLES
.ce
desc  -cf  -m 0  -i 10  <  file
prints a table of Cumulative Frequencies with
Minimum = 0 and Interval width = 10.
.ce
desc  -s  -m 100  -M 1000  <  file
prints summary Statistics for inputs between 100 and 1000.
