.TH FPACK 1 "November 2, 1987" "|STAT Software" "UNIX User's Manual"
.SH NAME
fpack \- pack and unpack ascii files with simple archiving scheme
.SH USAGE
.B fpack
[-fv]
[files]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I fpack
is a simple plain-text-file archiving scheme to either
reduce the number of files or to package them together.
It is designed to be portable to systems between which
files may be transferred, such as between UNIX and MSDOS.
It can save space on systems that use disk blocks for files that occupy
a small part of a block.
One of the program's requirements is that it does not alter the format
of its input, so files like documents or human readable data files
are not converted to a special format.
This allows unpacking by hand in an emergency
(e.g., the recipient of an archive does not have
.I fpack
to unpack).
.PP
Files are delimited by a special string at the start of a line:
.br
	fpack:!@#$%^&*():	<filename>
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.de OP
.TP
.B -\\$1 \\$2
..
.OP f
Forceful action.
.I fpack
will overwrite existing files it is unpacking
and continue when it can't open files.
.OP v
Verbose output.
.I fpack
will name the files it packs or unpacks.
.SH NOTES
.PP
Text outside file delimiters in an archive will be ignored.
So, files packed and sent through mailers
that add header lines and trailing signatures
will be unpacked safely.
.PP
If a file does not end with a newline character,
one will be silently added.
.PP
If a file to be unpacked exists,
then it will not be overwritten.
Instead, the packed contents for the file(s) being unpacked will be ignored.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
Pack up some C source files.
	fpack *.c > archive
Unpack all files.
	fpack < archive
.fi
