.TH PAIR 1 "January 20, 1987" "\(co 1980 Gary Perlman" "|STAT" "UNIX User's Manual"
.SH NAME
pair - paired data points analysis and plots
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pair
[-fps] [-h height] [-w width] [-c char] [-x xname] [-y yname]
.br
	[-t top] [-b bottom] [-l left] [-r right]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I pair
analyzes paired data by providing summary statistics and scattergrams.
.I pair
reads pairs of points (two points per line)
from the standard input and, without options,
provides statistics on the first variable (X), the second (Y),
and their difference.
If only one datum is on each line,
then
.I pair
will supply the datum number (1 to N) as the first variable
and use the datum as the second.
.SH OPTIONS
.de OP
.TP
.B -\\$1 \\$2
..
.OP b bottom
minimum Y value at the bottom of the plot (default: from data).
.OP c char
plotting character (default: frequency counts).
.OP f
do not print frame around plot (default: print frame).
.OP h height
set height of the plot to \fIheight\fR lines.
.OP l left
minimum X value at the left of the plot (default: from data).
.OP p
print bivariate plot.
.OP r right
maximum X value at the right of the plot (default: from data).
.OP s
requests summary statistics.
.OP t top
maximum Y value at the top of the plot (default: from data).
.OP w width
set width of the plot to \fIwidth\fR characters.
.OP x name
name of the first variable (default: "Column 1").
.OP y name
name of the second variable (default: "Column 2").
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
.ta 2i
.if n .ta 27n
pair -p -h 10 -w 20	# 10 high, 20 wide plot
abut a b | pair -x a -y b	# compare two single column files
.fi
.SH LIMITS
Use the -L option to determine the program limits.
.SH "MISSING VALUES
Cases with missing data values (NA) are counted but not included in the analysis.
