.TH STATS 1 "January 20, 1987" "\(co 1980 Gary Perlman" "|STAT" "UNIX User's Manual"
.SH NAME
stats \- print summary statistics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B stats
[-v] [n min max sum ss mean var sd skew kurt se]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I stats
prints summary statistics on the data read from the standard input.
The data can be in any format,
as long as some white space separates the input values.
Non-numerical input values are ignored,
so care must be taken to insure that the input is correct.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
With no options,
.I stats
prints a summary table of statistic names and values
separated by a tab delimited = sign.
When options are supplied,
.I stats
prints only the value of the statistics requested,
in the order they were requested, on one line.
.de OP
.TP
.B \\$1
..
.OP -v
Verbose output.
This option causes requested statistics to be printed
in name=value format.
.OP n
The number of real or integer values read in.
If no values are read in,
then all statistics are zero.
If one value is read in,
or if the variance of the distribution is zero,
then all the higher order statistics are zero.
.OP min
The minimum value.
.OP max
The maximum value.
.OP sum
The sum of the input values.
.OP ss
The sum of squares of the input values.
.OP mean
The arithmetic average: sum/n.
.OP var
The variance of the input,
computed with "n-1" degrees of freedom.
.OP sd
The square root of the variance.
.OP skew
The skewness of the distribution,
as computed by SPSS and desc(1).
.OP kurt
The kurtosis or pointiness of the distribution.
Normal distributions have a kurtosis of 3.
.OP se
The standard error of the input values.
.OP NA
Print the number of missing (NA) values.
Missing data are counted but not included in the analysis.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
.ta .5i
Print the standard error of the mean:
	stats sd n | dm "x1 / x2^.5"
.sp
Print the range of the data:
	stats min max | dm x2-x1
.sp
Print the sum of the first 100 integers:
	series 1 100 | stats sum
.sp
Print a t-test of the mean against 0.0:
	stats mean se | dm x1/x2
