.TH TS 1 "January 20, 1987" "\(co 1980 Gary Perlman" "|STAT" "UNIX User's Manual"
.SH NAME
ts \- time series analysis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ts
[-aeps] [-b base] [-c lag] [-i interval] [-l length]
.br
	[-P style] [-n number] [-w width]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I ts
performs a variety of time series analyses
on ordered data read from the standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.de OP
.TP
.B -\\$1 \\$2
..
.OP a
requests no axes around plot.
.OP b base
set the base label of the time series.
.OP c lag
print (auto)correlation of lags 1:lag.
These can be useful for detecting cycles and other trends within the data.
The output for a lag of zero is the correlation of the time series
with the numbers 1 through the length of the time series.
.OP e
echo the time series (may be useful with the
.B -l
option).
.OP i size
set the interval size for plot labels.
.OP l length
sets the length of the time series.
This can be useful for summarizing,
or for comparing time series of different lengths.
.OP n N
number the output lines of plots every N points.
.OP p
requests a time series plot.
A vertical mean line is used for the center of the plot.
.OP P plotnum
Plot type.
The default (type 1) plots points as deviations from the mean.
Plot type 2 plots points as lines above the minimum.
A line plot of the range indicating the mean and standard deviation
surround plots.
.OP s
Print summary statistics.
.OP w width
Plot width (default: 70).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Side-by-side plots can compare trends in series of different lengths:
.nf
	ts -p -w 20 -l 30 < data1 > plot1
	ts -p -w 20 -l 30 < data2 > plot2
	pr -m plot1 plot2
.fi
.SH LIMITS
Use the -L option to determine the program limits.
.SH "MISSING VALUES
Missing data values (NA) are counted but not included in the analysis.
